design-proposals/orch-cli.md, before:

# Design Proposal: Orchestrator Command Line Interface

Author(s): Scott Baker

Last updated: 2025-04-29

## Abstract

This ADR describes the implementation of a command line interface (CLI) for the
Orchestrator. The CLI is a cross-component tool that may be used from a Linux, Windows, or
Mac environment, such as from the administrator's laptop.

This ADR describes a CLI that uses the `Catalog CLI` as a strating point. However, this ADR
also assumes that syntax and semantics of the CLI may diverge from the existing `Catalog CLI` and
this ADR is not constrained by that existing implementation. As such, examples given in this
ADR may not necessarily work with the existing catalog CLI.

## Proposal

The CLI implements a set of verbs, a set of nouns, and a set of common options that may
be used to interact with the orchestrator.

The CLI follows a `verb - noun - subject` pattern. For example,

* `cli get application nginx`. The verb is `get`. The noun is `application` and the subject
  is `nginx`. This particular CLI command would return the application called nginx from the
  Orchestrator.

### Syntax

This section describes the syntax of the CLI.

#### Verbs

Note that some verbs may have synonyms. For example, `set` and `update` are synonyms for the same
verb.

##### Session Management

- `login <user-id>` ... log in to the Orchestrator. The CLI shall prompt for a password and retrieve
  a refresh token. The refresh token is cached locally until it is expired or a `logout` verb is used.

- `logout` ... log out of the Orchestrator. Any active login state, including the refresh token, is
  discarded.

##### CRUD Operations

- `list` ... lists objects on the Orchestrator. The `list` verb produces a list of all objects
  on the Orchestrator, with an optional filter. List should return tabular summary-level information
  about the objects.

- `get` / `describe` ... retrieves objects from the Orchestrator. `get` is for retrieving single objects whereas
  `list` is for retrieving multiple objects. `get` should retrieve more verbose information about the
  object than `list`.

- `create` ... creates an object on the Orchestrator. Additional noun-specific parameters are used to
  describe the properties of the object to be created.

- `delete` ... deletes an object from the Orchestrator.

- `set` / `update` ... modifies a value in an existing object on the Orchestrator.

- `apply` ... create or modify an object from a yaml or json specification, from stdin or from a local
  file.

##### Configuration and utility

- `config` ... configures the CLI. For example, `cli config set endpoint https://my-orchestrator.com/`
  TO-DO: This implementation inherited from the catalog CLI is ad-hoc and we should consider discarding
  it in favor treating configuration as any other verb-noun operation,
  i.e. `cli update config --endpoint https://my-orchestrator.com/`. 

- `completion` ... return a script that can be used to configure autocompletion.
  TO-DO: Consider treating completion as a verb/noun operation? i.e. `cli get completion bash`.

- `upload` ... upload items to the Orchestrator.

- `version` ... return the version number of the CLI.

- `watch` ... watch an object in the Orchestrator using webhook or stream interface, returning changes
  as they occur.
  TO-DO: drop this?

- `wipe` ... wipe all data in a project.
  TO-DO: drop this? Should be implemented as part of `cli delete project`.

#### Nouns

This ADR does not seek to exhaustively list the set of nouns that are available on the CLI. Each
component shall add their own nouns as appropriate. For example,

- `cli list applications` ... The `application` noun applies to applications in the catalog.

- `cli list registry` ... The `registry` noun applies to registries in the catalog.

#### Subjects

Subjects are additional information or context releated to a noun. Different nouns may support
different subjects. For convenience sake, most nouns support a name subject and optionally for those
objects that are versioned, a version subject. For example,

- `cli get application nginx` ... returns the first nginx application, agnostic to the version.

- `cli get application nginx 0.0.1` ... return exactly version 0.0.1 of the nginx application.

If additional subjects beyond name and version are required, then they should be specified with addional
options. For example,

- `cli get application nginx --deployed true` ... get the nginx application that is currently deployed.

#### Global Options

- `-h` / `--help` ... return help. The help returned may be contextualized to the verb or noun that is
  being used. For example `cli -h` returns global help whereas `cli create application -h` return help
  that is relevant to creating applications.

- `-n` / `--noauth` ... disables authentication checks, only useful in a devleopment environment.

- `-p` / `--project` ... sets the project that will be used for the current verb. Required for verbs that
  act on projects.

- `-v` / `--verbose` ... enables verbose output.

- `-o json` / `-o yaml` ... instead of returning human-readable output, return output in `yaml` or `json`.

#### Verb-Specific and/or Noun-Specific options.

Verbs and nouns may have addional non-global options as necessary. For example, the `create application`
verb/noun pair includes the options `--chart-name` and `--chart-registry` and `--chart-version`.

#### Examples

- `cli login sample-project-admin` ... log in as a user.

- `cli -p acme list applications nginx` ... list all nginx applications in a tabular format.

- `cli -p acme list applications nginx =o yaml` ... list all nginx applications and emit the output as yaml.

- `cli -p acme create application nginx 0.0.1 --chart-name nginx --chart-registry bitnami --chart-version 0.0.1`
  ... create the nginx application using the specified parameters.

- `cli -p acme delete applciation nginx 0.0.1` ... delete the nginx application.

- `cli -p acme update application nginx 0.0.1 --chart-registry dockerhub` ... change the chart-registry for an
  application.

- `cli -p acme apply -f nginx.yaml` ... create the objects contained inside nginx.yaml.

- `cli logout` ... log out.

### Miscellaneous

- The CLI should avoid distinguishing between singular and plural nouns. For example `list applications`
  and `list application` should be equivalent commands.

- The CLI stores its local state in the file (in a Linux environment) `~/.orch-cli/orch-cli.yaml`. This state
  includes the orchestrator endpoint, keycloak endpoint, default projects, logged in username, and logged in
  refresh token. This file should have permissions set appropriately.

- The CLI generally uses the single `api.` endpoint for the orchestrator. There are occasionally places where
  it may infer the names of additional endpoints. For example, during login it will infer the `keycloak.` endpoint
  by taking the `api.` endpoint and substituting `keylocak` for `api`. This may be done with other endpoints
  as necessary.

## Rationale

A fully autogenerated approach was discussed, but we feel this would too closely tie the CLI to the syntax
and structure of the API. The CLI is meant to abstract the operations of the API into a more human-consumable
format. 

- There may be times when a particular CLI operation leads to multiple API calls.

- Related objects may be internally resolved by the CLI as necessary. For example, a user might link objects A
  and B together by name, even if the API represents the link by an internal identifiers or uuids.

- If there are future breaking changes to the API, then the CLI may seek to insulate the user from those changes.

- Addtional context or explanation may be provided in the CLI, such as returning objects in a human-readable format.

## Affected components and Teams

Application Orchestration, Cluster Orchestration, EIM, Platform.

## Implementation plan

The CLI is to be implemented in the `go` programming language, using the popular `cobra` and `viper`
go libraries.

## Open issues (if applicable)

- Session / Context management. It would be convenient if the CLI could store the context for
  multiple orchestrator sessions and then easily switch between them.

Commit message:

add note on avoiding team/component boundaries

design-proposals/orch-cli.md, after:

# Design Proposal: Orchestrator Command Line Interface

Author(s): Scott Baker

Last updated: 2025-04-29

## Abstract

This ADR describes the implementation of a command line interface (CLI) for the
Orchestrator. The CLI is a cross-component tool that may be used from a Linux, Windows, or
Mac environment, such as from the administrator's laptop.

This ADR describes a CLI that uses the `Catalog CLI` as a strating point. However, this ADR
also assumes that syntax and semantics of the CLI may diverge from the existing `Catalog CLI` and
this ADR is not constrained by that existing implementation. As such, examples given in this
ADR may not necessarily work with the existing catalog CLI.

## Proposal

The CLI implements a set of verbs, a set of nouns, and a set of common options that may
be used to interact with the orchestrator.

The CLI follows a `verb - noun - subject` pattern. For example,

* `cli get application nginx`. The verb is `get`. The noun is `application` and the subject
  is `nginx`. This particular CLI command would return the application called nginx from the
  Orchestrator.

### Syntax

This section describes the syntax of the CLI.

#### Verbs

Note that some verbs may have synonyms. For example, `set` and `update` are synonyms for the same
verb.

##### Session Management

- `login <user-id>` ... log in to the Orchestrator. The CLI shall prompt for a password and retrieve
  a refresh token. The refresh token is cached locally until it is expired or a `logout` verb is used.

- `logout` ... log out of the Orchestrator. Any active login state, including the refresh token, is
  discarded.

##### CRUD Operations

- `list` ... lists objects on the Orchestrator. The `list` verb produces a list of all objects
  on the Orchestrator, with an optional filter. List should return tabular summary-level information
  about the objects.

- `get` / `describe` ... retrieves objects from the Orchestrator. `get` is for retrieving single objects whereas
  `list` is for retrieving multiple objects. `get` should retrieve more verbose information about the
  object than `list`.

- `create` ... creates an object on the Orchestrator. Additional noun-specific parameters are used to
  describe the properties of the object to be created.

- `delete` ... deletes an object from the Orchestrator.

- `set` / `update` ... modifies a value in an existing object on the Orchestrator.

- `apply` ... create or modify an object from a yaml or json specification, from stdin or from a local
  file.

##### Configuration and utility

- `config` ... configures the CLI. For example, `cli config set endpoint https://my-orchestrator.com/`
  TO-DO: This implementation inherited from the catalog CLI is ad-hoc and we should consider discarding
  it in favor treating configuration as any other verb-noun operation,
  i.e. `cli update config --endpoint https://my-orchestrator.com/`. 

- `completion` ... return a script that can be used to configure autocompletion.
  TO-DO: Consider treating completion as a verb/noun operation? i.e. `cli get completion bash`.

- `upload` ... upload items to the Orchestrator.

- `version` ... return the version number of the CLI.

- `watch` ... watch an object in the Orchestrator using webhook or stream interface, returning changes
  as they occur.
  TO-DO: drop this?

- `wipe` ... wipe all data in a project.
  TO-DO: drop this? Should be implemented as part of `cli delete project`.

#### Nouns

This ADR does not seek to exhaustively list the set of nouns that are available on the CLI. Each
component shall add their own nouns as appropriate. For example,

- `cli list applications` ... The `application` noun applies to applications in the catalog.

- `cli list registry` ... The `registry` noun applies to registries in the catalog.

#### Subjects

Subjects are additional information or context releated to a noun. Different nouns may support
different subjects. For convenience sake, most nouns support a name subject and optionally for those
objects that are versioned, a version subject. For example,

- `cli get application nginx` ... returns the first nginx application, agnostic to the version.

- `cli get application nginx 0.0.1` ... return exactly version 0.0.1 of the nginx application.

If additional subjects beyond name and version are required, then they should be specified with addional
options. For example,

- `cli get application nginx --deployed true` ... get the nginx application that is currently deployed.

#### Global Options

- `-h` / `--help` ... return help. The help returned may be contextualized to the verb or noun that is
  being used. For example `cli -h` returns global help whereas `cli create application -h` return help
  that is relevant to creating applications.

- `-n` / `--noauth` ... disables authentication checks, only useful in a devleopment environment.

- `-p` / `--project` ... sets the project that will be used for the current verb. Required for verbs that
  act on projects.

- `-v` / `--verbose` ... enables verbose output.

- `-o json` / `-o yaml` ... instead of returning human-readable output, return output in `yaml` or `json`.

#### Verb-Specific and/or Noun-Specific options.

Verbs and nouns may have addional non-global options as necessary. For example, the `create application`
verb/noun pair includes the options `--chart-name` and `--chart-registry` and `--chart-version`.

#### Examples

- `cli login sample-project-admin` ... log in as a user.

- `cli -p acme list applications nginx` ... list all nginx applications in a tabular format.

- `cli -p acme list applications nginx =o yaml` ... list all nginx applications and emit the output as yaml.

- `cli -p acme create application nginx 0.0.1 --chart-name nginx --chart-registry bitnami --chart-version 0.0.1`
  ... create the nginx application using the specified parameters.

- `cli -p acme delete applciation nginx 0.0.1` ... delete the nginx application.

- `cli -p acme update application nginx 0.0.1 --chart-registry dockerhub` ... change the chart-registry for an
  application.

- `cli -p acme apply -f nginx.yaml` ... create the objects contained inside nginx.yaml.

- `cli logout` ... log out.

### Miscellaneous

- The CLI seeks to minimize the boundaries between teams and components. For example, the following approaches
  are not desirable:

  - `cli update app-orch application foo` ... app-orch is a team/subsystem designator that is not relevant to
    the user.

  - `cli update catalog application foo` ... catalog is a component name. It is not relevant to the user that
    applications are managed by the catalog service.

- The CLI should avoid distinguishing between singular and plural nouns. For example `list applications`
  and `list application` should be equivalent commands.

- The CLI stores its local state in the file (in a Linux environment) `~/.orch-cli/orch-cli.yaml`. This state
  includes the orchestrator endpoint, keycloak endpoint, default projects, logged in username, and logged in
  refresh token. This file should have permissions set appropriately.

- The CLI generally uses the single `api.` endpoint for the orchestrator. There are occasionally places where
  it may infer the names of additional endpoints. For example, during login it will infer the `keycloak.` endpoint
  by taking the `api.` endpoint and substituting `keylocak` for `api`. This may be done with other endpoints
  as necessary.

## Rationale

A fully autogenerated approach was discussed, but we feel this would too closely tie the CLI to the syntax
and structure of the API. The CLI is meant to abstract the operations of the API into a more human-consumable
format. 

- There may be times when a particular CLI operation leads to multiple API calls.

- Related objects may be internally resolved by the CLI as necessary. For example, a user might link objects A
  and B together by name, even if the API represents the link by an internal identifiers or uuids.

- If there are future breaking changes to the API, then the CLI may seek to insulate the user from those changes.

- Addtional context or explanation may be provided in the CLI, such as returning objects in a human-readable format.

## Affected components and Teams

Application Orchestration, Cluster Orchestration, EIM, Platform.

## Implementation plan

The CLI is to be implemented in the `go` programming language, using the popular `cobra` and `viper`
go libraries.

## Open issues (if applicable)

- Session / Context management. It would be convenient if the CLI could store the context for
  multiple orchestrator sessions and then easily switch between them.
